Behavior around key availability delays during handshake (#3874)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-recovery.md

samples, and rttvar is the variation in the RTT samples, estimated using a
mean variation.

The calculation of smoothed_rtt uses RTT samples after adjusting them for
acknowledgement delays. These delays are computed using the ACK Delay field of
the ACK frame as described in Section 19.3 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

The peer might report acknowledgement delays that are larger than the peer's
max_ack_delay during the handshake (Section 13.2.1 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}). To
account for this, the endpoint SHOULD ignore max_ack_delay until the handshake
is confirmed (Section 4.1.2 of {{QUIC-TLS}}). When they occur, these large
acknowledgement delays are likely to be non-repeating and limited to the
handshake. The endpoint can therefore use them without limiting them to the
max_ack_delay, avoiding unnecessary inflation of the RTT estimate.

Ignoring max_ack_delay at the beginning of the connection can lead to a
substantially inflated smoothed_rtt. Therefore, prior to handshake confirmation,
an endpoint MAY ignore RTT samples if subtracting the acknowledgement delay

> causes the sample to be less than the min_rtt.

Author: I'm not sure if I follow this sentence. I thought that adjusted_rtt can never become smaller than min_rtt, and that would continue to be the case with this PR?

is confirmed (Section 4.1.2 of {{QUIC-TLS}}). When they occur, these large
acknowledgement delays are likely to be non-repeating and limited to the
handshake. The endpoint can therefore use them without limiting them to the
max_ack_delay, avoiding unnecessary inflation of the RTT estimate.

Note however that a large acknowledgement delay can result in a substantially
inflated smoothed_rtt, if there is either an error in the peer's reporting of
the acknowledgement delay or in the endpoint's min_rtt estimate.  Therefore,
prior to handshake confirmation, an endpoint can ignore RTT samples if adjusting
the RTT sample for acknowledgement delay causes the sample to be less than the
min_rtt.

After the handshake is confirmed, any acknowledgement delays reported by the
peer that are greater than the peer's max_ack_delay are attributed to
unintentional but potentially repeating delays, such as scheduler latency at the
peer or loss of previous acknowledgements. Therefore, these extra delays are
considered effectively part of path delay and incorporated into the RTT
estimate.

Therefore, when adjusting an RTT sample using peer-reported acknowledgement
delays, an endpoint:

> - MAY ignore the acknowledgement delay for Initial packets,

Reviewer: If I understand correctly,  this leads to a higher current_rtt measurement. It would be nice if the paragraph above included a motivation for that.

Reviewer 2: This shouldn't because the peer is expected to ack these immediately. Added text and a reference.

mean variation.

The calculation of smoothed_rtt uses path latency after adjusting RTT samples
for acknowledgement delays. These delays are computed using the ACK Delay
field of the ACK frame as described in Section 19.3 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

As the peer might report acknowledgement delays that are larger than the peer's
max_ack_delay during the handshake (Section 13.2.1 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}), the
endpoint MAY ignore max_ack_delay until the handshake is confirmed (Section
4.1.2 of {{QUIC-TLS}}). Since these large acknowledgement delays, when they
occur, are likely to be non-repeating and limited to the handshake, the endpoint
can use them without limiting them to the max_ack_delay and avoid unnecessarily
inflating the smoothed_rtt estimate.

After the handshake is confirmed, any acknowledgement delays reported by the

> peer that are greater than its max_ack_delay are attributed to unintentional but

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
peer that are greater than the peer's max_ack_delay are attributed to unintentional but
```

potentially repeating delays, such as scheduler latency at the peer or loss of

> previous acknowledgements. Any delays beyond the peer's max_ack_delay are
> therefore considered effectively part of path delay and incorporated into the
> smoothed_rtt estimate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
previous acknowledgements. Therefore, these extra delays are considered
effectively part of path delay and incorporated into the smoothed_rtt and
rttvar.
```

When adjusting an RTT sample using peer-reported acknowledgement delays, an
endpoint:

> - MAY ignore the acknowledgement delay for Initial packets,

Reviewer 3: Given we say you should acknowledge these immediately, why is this a MAY?  I'm not aware of any issues this solves vs a MUST or SHOULD.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/pull/3874#discussion_r465425760

Reviewer 3: Sorry, read it backwards.  Nevermind.

> - SHOULD ignore the peer's max_ack_delay until the handshake is confirmed,

Reviewer 3: You have "MAY ignore max_ack_delay until the handshake is confirmed" above.

Reviewer 2: Gah! That MAY should've been fixed. Fixed now.

mean variation.

The calculation of smoothed_rtt uses path latency after adjusting RTT samples
for acknowledgement delays. These delays are computed using the ACK Delay
field of the ACK frame as described in Section 19.3 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

> As the peer might report acknowledgement delays that are larger than the peer's
> max_ack_delay during the handshake (Section 13.2.1 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}), the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The peer might report acknowledgement delays that are larger than the peer's
max_ack_delay during the handshake (Section 13.2.1 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}), so the
```

endpoint SHOULD ignore max_ack_delay until the handshake is confirmed (Section

> 4.1.2 of {{QUIC-TLS}}). Since these large acknowledgement delays, when they

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4.1.2 of {{QUIC-TLS}}). Since these acknowledgement delays, when they
```

Reviewer 2: If you remove the "large" qualifier, the sentence seems to suggest that ack delays are limited to the handshake. Leaving this out.

occur, are likely to be non-repeating and limited to the handshake, the endpoint

> can use them without limiting them to the max_ack_delay and avoid unnecessarily

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
can use them without limiting them to the max_ack_delay to avoid unnecessarily
```

> inflating the smoothed_rtt estimate.

Reviewer 4: It's not only smoothed_rtt, but also rttvar.
```suggestion
inflating the RTT estimate.
```

After the handshake is confirmed, any acknowledgement delays reported by the
peer that are greater than the peer's max_ack_delay are attributed to
unintentional but potentially repeating delays, such as scheduler latency at the
peer or loss of previous acknowledgements. Therefore, these extra delays are
considered effectively part of path delay and incorporated into the smoothed_rtt

> estimate.

Reviewer 4: Not sure where to put this, but do we need to recommend something along these lines:
If you set an ack timer for `x ms`, you should advertise a max_ack_delay for `x ms + timer_granularity` in your transport parameters?

Reviewer 5: I thought we already had something like this, but I agree with the sentiment. MsQuic does exactly this.

Reviewer 2: Safeguards are always up to the implementation... this includes any for the idle timeout as well. At any rate, the sender is protected by the rttvar.

I'd be open to an editorial PR that suggests this in the right place.

Reviewer 3: I agree with @nibanks that I thought we already had text for that, though it'd be in transport.

When adjusting an RTT sample using peer-reported acknowledgement delays, an
endpoint:

- MAY ignore the acknowledgement delay for Initial packets,

- SHOULD ignore the peer's max_ack_delay until the handshake is confirmed,

- MUST use the lesser of the acknowledgement delay and the peer's max_ack_delay
  after the handshake is confirmed,

> - MUST NOT apply the adjustments above if the resulting RTT sample is smaller

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- MUST NOT subtract the acknowledgement delay if the resulting RTT sample is smaller
```

> - MAY ignore the peer's max_ack_delay until the handshake is confirmed,

Reviewer 6: Do we want to say SHOULD here instead, given that buffering happens?

It means updating pseudocode, but the change is small.

Reviewer 2: I think SHOULD is good.

Reviewer 2: @ianswett may have an opinion here. I'll wait for it.

Author: +1 to changing it to SHOULD. As others have pointed out, there are cases that the delay is inevitable (e.g., due to a client doing OCSP cert validation).

Reviewer 3: I think that's ok, but is there a reason line 371 is a MAY instead of a SHOULD?  I can't think of any.  If it was a SHOULD, the the pseudocode should follow the SHOULDs.

Reviewer 6: MAY is in recognition of the fact that an attacker can already tilt the calculation for RTT using Initial ACK, so we allow people to ignore that information, but we don't need to recommend it.

> Additionaly, an endpoint might postpone the processing of acknowledgements when
> the corresponding decryption keys are not immediately available. For example, a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionaly, an endpoint might be unable to process acknowledgements when
the corresponding decryption keys are not immediately available. For example, a
```

Reviewer 2: This is a useful distinction -- endpoints that are unable to process acks because keys aren't there can simply drop those packets too. That won't reflect in the delay.

client might receive an acknowledgement for a 0-RTT packet that it cannot
decrypt because 1-RTT packet protection keys are not yet available to it. In

> such cases, an endpoint SHOULD ignore such local delays in its RTT sample until

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
such cases, an endpoint SHOULD subtract such local delays from its RTT sample until
```

> such cases, an endpoint SHOULD ignore such local delays in its round-trip time

Author: ```suggestion
such cases, an endpoint SHOULD ignore such local delays in its RTT
```

"RTT" is the term we use, I think?

mean variation.

The calculation of smoothed_rtt uses path latency after adjusting RTT samples
for acknowledgement delays. These delays are computed using the ACK Delay
field of the ACK frame as described in Section 19.3 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

> A peer MUST immediately acknowledge all ack-eliciting Initial packets.

Reviewer 6: Does this belong in the transport draft too?  And maybe we can include Handshake packets by conditioning this: "acknowledge all ack-eliciting Initial and Handshake packets immediately after processing them"

Reviewer 3: This is already in the transport draft, so I'd be inclined to remove it, and if you want to add an informational comment about how Initial and Handshake packets are acknowledged immediately, feel free.

Reviewer 6: Sounds reasonable.

> Prior to handshake confirmation, a peer might not have the packet protection

Reviewer 3: I think decryption keys is better in this context, since protection keys implies the keys to send a packet, and the server has keys to send 0.5 RTT packets, but not process them.

keys for Handshake, 0-RTT, or 1-RTT packets when they are received. It might
therefore buffer them and acknowledge them when the requisite keys become

> available. When this is not the case, the peer MUST immediately acknowledge all

Reviewer 3: The section on ACK behavior is in transport, let's not duplicate select parts of it here.

ack-eliciting Handshake packets, and MUST NOT delay acknowledgement of
ack-eliciting 0-RTT, or 1-RTT packets for any longer than the period that it
advertised in the max_ack_delay transport parameter (Section 18.2 of

> {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}).

Reviewer 6: With the above change I suggest, you can move this out and talk about acknowledgment within 0 (Initial/Handshake) or max_ack_delay (0-RTT/1-RTT) of processing the packet.  That leaves this paragraph as just "an endpoint might have to delay processing until it has keys".

> Since the peer might report large acknowledgement delays during the handshake,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
As the peer might report large acknowledgement delays during the handshake,
```

The calculation of smoothed_rtt uses path latency after adjusting RTT samples
for acknowledgement delays. These delays are computed using the ACK Delay
field of the ACK frame as described in Section 19.3 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

> When 0-RTT or 1-RTT ack-eliciting packets are received, a peer does not delay

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When 0-RTT or 1-RTT ack-eliciting packets are received, a peer MUST NOT delay
```

acknowledging them any longer than the period it advertised in the max_ack_delay

> transport parameter; see Section 18.2 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

Reviewer 6: We need to add: ...except during the handshake, if packets cannot be processed when received due to lack of packet protection keys.

> However, an endpoint SHOULD use ignore max_ack_delay until the handshake is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, an endpoint SHOULD ignore max_ack_delay until the handshake is
```

confirmed (Section 4.1.2 of {{QUIC-TLS}}). Prior to handshake confirmation, the
peer's reported acknowledgement delays might exceed the peer's max_ack_delay
because it might buffer undecryptable packets and acknowledge them when the
requisite keys become available to it. Since these delays, when they occur, are
measurable and limited to the handshake, the endpoint can use the delays without
limiting them to the max_ack_delay and avoid unnecessarily inflating the
smoothed_rtt estimate.

> After the handshake is confirmed, any acknowledgement delays reported by the

Reviewer 3: Handshake confirmed only works for 1-RTT packets.  But Handshake packets suffer from the same problem as 1-RTT packets.

peer that are greater than its max_ack_delay are attributed to unintentional but
potentially repeating delays, such as scheduler latency at the peer or loss of
previous acknowledgements. Any delays beyond the peer's max_ack_delay are
therefore considered effectively part of path delay and incorporated into the
smoothed_rtt estimate.

When adjusting an RTT sample using peer-reported acknowledgement delays, an
endpoint:

> - MUST ignore the ACK Delay field of the ACK frame for packets sent in the

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- MAY ignore the ACK Delay field of the ACK frame for packets sent in the
```

  Initial and Handshake packet number space.

> - MUST ignore the peer's max_ack_delay until the handshake is confirmed,

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- SHOULD ignore the peer's max_ack_delay until the handshake is confirmed,
```

handshake. The endpoint can therefore use them without limiting them to the
max_ack_delay, avoiding unnecessary inflation of the RTT estimate.

Ignoring max_ack_delay at the beginning of the connection can lead to a

> substantially inflated smoothed_rtt. Therefore, prior to handshake confirmation,

Author: I do not think that this sentence is correct. Ignoring `max_ack_delay` is a way to prevent inflation of SRTT. The problem here is that ignoring `max_ack_delay` is not enough, if `min_rtt` is not established.

handshake. The endpoint can therefore use them without limiting them to the
max_ack_delay, avoiding unnecessary inflation of the RTT estimate.

> Note however that a large acknowledgement delay can result in a substantially

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A large acknowledgement delay can result in a substantially
```

Reviewer 2: This connects it to the previous para, which is useful I think.

inflated smoothed_rtt, if there is either an error in the peer's reporting of
the acknowledgement delay or in the endpoint's min_rtt estimate.  Therefore,

> prior to handshake confirmation, an endpoint can ignore RTT samples if adjusting

Reviewer 3: Is this better as a MAY?  We never say you can ignore RTT samples in any other circumstance, so this feels a bit new.
```suggestion
prior to handshake confirmation, an endpoint MAY ignore RTT samples if adjusting
```

On subsequent RTT samples, smoothed_rtt and rttvar evolve as follows:

~~~

> ack_delay = decoded ACK Delay field from ACK frame

Reviewer 3: I think the old text was clearer in this case.
```suggestion
ack_delay = acknowledgement delay from ACK frame
```

Reviewer 2: it's setting a variable, so spelling out that it is a decoded field seems more explicit.

Reviewer 3: I think the most correct clear option is "decoded acknowledgement delay from the ACK Delay field in the ACK frame", but that's quite long.

Reviewer 5: Maybe something like `ack_frame.ack_delay`?

rttvar = 3/4 * rttvar + 1/4 * rttvar_sample
~~~

> An endpoint might postpone the processing of acknowledgements when the

Reviewer 3: I agree this would be better above.  Also, I think we should make this tighter, since it only applies ACKs of 0-RTT and 0.5-RTT packets.

corresponding decryption keys are not immediately available. For example, a
client might receive an acknowledgement for a 0-RTT packet that it cannot
decrypt because 1-RTT packet protection keys are not yet available to it. In
such cases, an endpoint SHOULD ignore such local delays in its round-trip time

> sample until the handshake is confirmed.

Author: I would prefer this section moved above line 358 (i.e. "When adjusting an RTT sample using peer-reported acknowledgement delays, an endpoint:"), and this SHOULD repeated in one of the bullet points, as we do for the ack-delay due to buffering on the receiver side.

That said, I wouldn't be surprised if you chose to do that as a separate editorial path after merging this PR.

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with moving this further up, before the smoothed_rtt computation, but I don't think we want to include this in that list. That list is about adjusting the RTT sample based on reported ack delay, and it ends with "don't do it if the result is < min_rtt". The local buffering delay is quite different, in that it doesn't need this min_rtt protection. I'm moving it up but leaving it below the adjustment list.

> sample until the handshake is confirmed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An endpoint might receive packets in ApplicationData containing
acknowledgements which cannot be processed immediately due to a
lack of 1-RTT decryption keys. For example, a client might receive an
acknowledgement for a 0-RTT packet that it cannot decrypt because
1-RTT packet protection keys are not yet available to it. In such cases,
an endpoint SHOULD subtract the time the packet was buffered and
unable to be decrypted from the round-trip time sample.
```

rttvar = 3/4 * rttvar + 1/4 * rttvar_sample
~~~

An endpoint might postpone the processing of acknowledgements when the
corresponding decryption keys are not immediately available. For example, a
client might receive an acknowledgement for a 0-RTT packet that it cannot
decrypt because 1-RTT packet protection keys are not yet available to it. In

> such cases, an endpoint can ignore such local delays in its round-trip time

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
such cases, an endpoint SHOULD ignore such local delays in its round-trip time
```

set based on the latest RTT information and for the last sent packet in the
correct packet number space.

When setting the PTO timer, the ApplicationData packet number space (Section
4.1.1 of {{QUIC-TLS}}) MUST be ignored until the handshake completes. Not arming
the PTO for ApplicationData prevents a client from retransmitting a 0-RTT packet

> on a PTO expiration before confirming that the server is able to decrypt 0-RTT

Reviewer 4: The client knows that the server is able to decrypt 0-RTT packets once it receives the ServerHello. The reason why it shouldn't retransmit these packets is that the client doesn't have the 1-RTT keys it would need to unprotected the ACKs sent for those packets.

Author: I think you are correct in pointing out the ACK case, though
* the argument to not send 0-RTT probes before learning if the peer is accepting 0-RTT still holds; that's the only signal available to the client when the server rejects 0-RTT
* technically the acceptance (or rejection) of 0-RTT data is transmitting in EncryptedExtensions, not ServerHello.

In b5e0c16 I've changed the text to point out that both endpoints are covered by the ACK case.

packets, and prevents a server from sending a 1-RTT packet on a PTO expiration
before the client obtains the keys to decrypt the 1-RTT packet (Section 4.1.4 of
{{QUIC-TLS}}) or before the server obtains the keys to process an
acknowledgement.

When ack-eliciting packets in multiple packet number spaces are in flight,

> the timer MUST be set for the packet number space with the earliest timeout.

Reviewer 4: This now seems to contradict the previous paragraph.

Author: Yeah technically we can say that "the timer MUST be set for the (non-ignored) packet number space with the earliest timeout." But does that make a difference?

Reviewer 6: It probably pays to be precise in this case.  You could instead say that you set the Initial or Handshake PTO timer based on which space has the earliest timeout.

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. Applied in 3e3421b.

set based on the latest RTT information and for the last sent packet in the
correct packet number space.

> When setting the PTO timer, the ApplicationData packet number space (Section

Reviewer 3: Can you clarify what the goal of changing this section is?  I feel it was clearer before, but I suspect there's something you're trying to improve.

Author: As pointed out in https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/pull/3874#discussion_r452560791, the existing text can be read in two ways, depending on how you interpret "with one exception." This PR rearranges two requirements to different paragraphs to be clear that there is no dependency between the two requirements.

4.1.1 of {{QUIC-TLS}}) MUST be ignored until the handshake is confirmed. Not
arming the PTO timer on ApplicationData prevents an endpoint from retransmitting
data in packets when the peer might not yet have the keys necessary to process
them or when the endpoint does not yet have the keys necessary to process their

> acknowledgements. For instance, this can happen when a client retransmits data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
acknowledgements. For instance, this could happen if a client retransmitted data
```

sent in 0-RTT packets to the server before confirming that the server is able to

> decrypt 0-RTT packets. Or it can happen when a server retransmits data sent in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
decrypt 0-RTT packets. Or it could happen if a server retransmitted data sent in
```

either endpoint might not have the ability to read until the handshake is

> complete.

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. Applied in b906534 with slight tweaks. PTAL.

> complete or confirmed.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
complete.
```

Confirmation tells us that our peer has a completed handshake.  This is not a useful state here, because we are talking about a specific endpoint and their ability to read doesn't depend on confirmation.

I was questioning whether we should block probing more.  That is, until the handshake is confirmed.  That has performance implications, because you don't probe for longer, but it does mean that you never probe without being sure that the probe can be answered.

I suspect that there is a trade-off here.  Waiting for handshake complete is not perfect, but it is close enough that it is good enough.  Ideally we could run experiments to tell us when spurious losses due to keys not being available and set a policy based on that.  Because that is ultimately what this is: a policy that we use to protect the core recovery algorithm.

Maybe that suggests a different answer: we are going to pick a point at which we recommend that probing starts.  That will be imperfect and that's OK.  To that end, this MUST seems like a problem.

Author: Thank you for the suggestion. I agree that the reference to handshake confirmation is unnecessary if not incorrect. Removed.

Regarding what should be written down in spec, I tend to agree that this should better be a recommendation rather than a requirement. We need to be clear to state when probes *have* to be sent in order to avoid deadlock, but anything above that can just be recommended.

That said, I would not mind leaving the normative text as they are now, so that we could call the changes to the recovery draft editorial. MUSTs in the recovery drafts are often recommendations, after all.

When ack-eliciting packets in multiple packet number spaces are in flight,
the timer MUST be set to the earlier value of the Initial and Handshake packet

> number spaces.

Reviewer 3: I think this is a behavior change and I don't think it's always correct, since it causes the timer to never be armed for ApplicationData anytime anything in Handshake is in flight.  There are cases the Handshake keys have been dropped by the server and the Handshake data will never be acknowledged.

Author: Regarding if the new approach works, it does, because the server would make sure that all the handshake messages up to ServerFinished would be delivered to the client, and then the client would make sure that ClientFinished would be delivered to the server. At that moment, the server would be allowed to send 1-RTT probes.

Regarding if this is a design change rather than editorial, the answer depends on how we interpret the existing text. [Section 6.2.1](https://quicwg.org/base-drafts/draft-ietf-quic-recovery.html#section-6.2.1-6) currently states:
> When ack-eliciting packets in multiple packet number spaces are in flight, the timer MUST be set for the packet number space with the earliest timeout, with one exception. The ApplicationData packet number space (Section 4.1.1 of QUIC-TLS) MUST be ignored until the handshake completes.

There are two ways to interpret these two sentences, depending on if we consider the MUST in the second sentence to be a sub-condition of the first sentence, or consider the two sentences as listing two distinct requirements. @marten-seemann points out that the latter is what the pseudo-code does, and assuming that is the case, there is no design change.

Reviewer 4: @ianswett When you drop keys, you're also supposed to drop the corresponding packets in that packet number space, so the Handshake packets in your example would not be considered outstanding.

That being said, I have to admit I don't understand why the existing text is ambiguous. @kazuho's change here (the one to the -recovery document), if I understand it correctly, is purely editorial.

Reviewer 2: @ianswett This isn't behavior change. I've suggested a rephrase above that ought to make this clearer.

Reviewer 3: To be clear, the confirmed/complete aspect is a behavior change, which means for example that the client only arms PTO for a single PN space at once.

But this updated text looks good, assuming we go with that design change.

set based on the latest RTT information and for the last sent packet in the
correct packet number space.

When setting the PTO timer, the ApplicationData packet number space (Section
4.1.1 of {{QUIC-TLS}}) MUST be ignored until the handshake completes. Not arming
the PTO for ApplicationData prevents unnecessary transmissions on a PTO
expiration, such as:

* an endpoint sending probe packets before obtaining the keys to process an
  acknowledgement,

> * a client sending 0-RTT probe packets before confirming that the server is able

Reviewer 4: I believe we should remove this bullet point. See https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/pull/3874#discussion_r451515406 for the reasoning.

Author: Yeah my point in https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/pull/3874#discussion_r451557053 was that if the server rejects the 0-RTT, then that rejection acts as an alternative to ACK, and that therefore it might be worth mentioning.

But anyways I've applied MT's suggestion in daf4de0, I think it resolves your concern.

>   to decrypt 0-RTT packets, or

Reviewer 6: Maybe this can be made more generic: 

A receiver might lack the keys necessary to process packets, or the sender might lack the keys necessary to process acknowledgments.  This occurs when the client sends 0-RTT packets as the server might not accept 0-RTT and the client will not have 1-RTT keys for processing acknowledgments until the handshake completes.  This occurs for 1-RTT packets as either endpoint might not have the ability to read until the handshake is complete.

Though this made me realize: we say "complete", but if you need to know that you have keys AND you peer has keys, you need to wait for "confirmed".

Author: Makes sense. Applied in 8af4de0.

The PTO period is the amount of time that a sender ought to wait for an
acknowledgement of a sent packet.  This time period includes the estimated
network roundtrip-time (smoothed_rtt), the variation in the estimate (4*rttvar),
and max_ack_delay, to account for the maximum time by which a receiver might
delay sending an acknowledgement.

When the PTO is armed for Initial or Handshake packet number spaces, the

> max_ack_delay in the PTO period computation is set to 0, since the peer is

Reviewer 3: This seems potentially at odds with the text above about ignoring max_ack_delay until the handshake is confirmed?

Reviewer 2: I've changed the text to be a bit clearer, but this text is still ok and useful for Initial packets and useful if the implementation doesn't follow the SHOULD above or harmless for Handshake packets.

The PTO period is the amount of time that a sender ought to wait for an
acknowledgement of a sent packet.  This time period includes the estimated
network roundtrip-time (smoothed_rtt), the variation in the estimate (4*rttvar),
and max_ack_delay, to account for the maximum time by which a receiver might
delay sending an acknowledgement.

When the PTO is armed for Initial or Handshake packet number spaces, the
max_ack_delay in the PTO period computation is set to 0, as specified in 13.2.1
of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

The PTO period MUST be at least kGranularity, to avoid the timer expiring
immediately.

When ack-eliciting packets in multiple packet number spaces are in flight, the
timer MUST be set to the earlier value of the Initial and Handshake packet
number spaces.

> An endpoint MUST NOT set its PTO timer for 0-RTT and 1-RTT packets until the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An endpoint MUST NOT set its PTO timer for the ApplicationData packet number space until the
```

When the PTO is armed for Initial or Handshake packet number spaces, the
max_ack_delay in the PTO period computation is set to 0, since the peer is

> expected to not delay these packets intentionally; see 13.2.1 of

Reviewer 3: I think the old text is better, I'll need to re-read the entire text to understand my comment.

```suggestion
expected to acknowledge these packets immediately; see 13.2.1 of
```

Reviewer 3: After a re-read, I think I was thinking this was a problem for packets in ApplicationData, but after re-thinking this, I don't think there's an issue there.  I posted this 1 minute before our editors meeting, so I suspect I was a bit rushed.

      IncludesAckEliciting(newly_acked_packets)):
    latest_rtt =
      now - sent_packets[pn_space][ack.largest_acked].time_sent
    ack_delay = ack.ack_delay

>     UpdateRtt(ack_delay)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    UpdateRtt(ack.ack_delay)
```

  if (newly_acked_packets.empty()):
    return

  // Update the RTT if the largest acknowledged is newly acked
  // and at least one ack-eliciting was newly acked.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

      IncludesAckEliciting(newly_acked_packets)):
    latest_rtt =
      now() - newly_acked_packets.largest().time_sent

>     UpdateRtt(ack.ack_delay)

Reviewer 6: We should change line ~1285 down there vv to:

```
  if handshake confirmed:
    ack_delay = min(ack_delay, max_ack_delay)
```

Reviewer 3: GetPtoTimeAndSpace needs to be updated to use handshake confirmed as well

Reviewer 6: Good catch.

Reviewer 2: Done.

  // min_rtt ignores acknowledgment delay.
  min_rtt = min(min_rtt, latest_rtt)

>   // Limit ack_delay to max_ack_delay after handshake confirmation.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  // Apply max_ack_delay after handshake confirmation.
```
